[MUSIC]
In this video, we're going to look at how
we can use VLOOKUP to match data exactly,
and we're also going to take a peek
at the brand new XLOOKUP function.
So coming back to the reconciliation,
Zara has identified that in our
MCI report, there are 84 invoices,
whereas if we check our supplier
statement, there are actually 85.
So we know there's at least one record
in the supplier statement that is
not in the MC report.
What we need to do is
find out which one and
probably the easiest way to
do that is using a vlookup.
Now, just coming back to our MC report for
a moment.
When we do the lookup,
we're going to use the whole table.
We're going to match the customer
reference to our payment reference,
which is in the first column, and
we're going to get back the amount,
because as well as identifying
which record is missing,
we're also going to double-check
that all the amounts match.
Now, to save us counting later on,
the amount happens to be
the tenth column in this data set.
That is something you will need to
check before doing your VLOOKUP.
So back in our supplier statement, we're
going to click in U2 and type "=vl" and Tab.
Our lookup value, the thing we're going
to match, is our customer reference, and
we're going to match that
into our table MC, and comma.
Our column index - the column we want
to get the value of back from -
is in the tenth position in that table.
And now, the most important thing for
the exact match,
we have to specify it's an exact match.
Now, it's strange.
We choose false, what that means
is it's not a range lookup.
So you can either do that, or if you get
tired of doing that, you can just put a 0,
they work work the same in VLOOKUP.
And when we press Enter,
we can straight away see that
the first record doesn't have a match.
That NA is not really an error,
it is just telling us that
the VLOOKUP couldn't find a match.
Now, on closer inspection, you'll see
that this invoice was paid in March, and
we are only trying to process
invoices that were paid in April.
So that shouldn't even be on the list.
We've just identified and
solved another part of the problem.
What we do want to double-check though is
that all of these amounts actually match,
and the easiest way to do that is to just
add a little bit to our calculation.
So I'm going to double-click into U2,
click after the "=", and we'll take
the amount in our supplier statement and
subtract the amount in our MC report.
And you can see most of them are 0,
which is what we would expect, but
we do have one anomaly which is going
to need a little more investigation.
Before we get into that though,
with a recon,
it's always a good idea to
match both ways, because there
could be information in the MC report
that's not in the supplier statement.
So we could do another VLOOKUP, but
we would need to create a Named Range or
something, because you'll notice
the customer reference is not
in the first column in this data set.
VLOOKUP also has a few other limitations,
and
one function that can help us get around
these limitations is the XLOOKUP function,
and that's what we're
going to look at next.
Now, the XLOOKUP doesn't
look up entire tables,
it just works with individual columns or
rows.
So it's easier if you name them first,
you'll see we have already named our
Customer Reference, but
we haven't named our Amount column.
So remember,
we're going to come into our table,
click once at the top of the column, click
a second time to include the headings,
and then to create our named range
using Create from Selection,
we're going to press
"Ctrl + Shift + F3" and Enter.
Okay, both our columns named,
let's come into our invoice report, and
we're going to click into Q5, and we're
going to type "=xl", for XLOOKUP, and Tab.
Now, the XLOOKUP does not
have to work vertically,
it can work horizontally or vertically,
so it's really an advantage.
The lookup value is exactly the same.
We're going to click on our Payment
Reference and type a comma, but now,
the lookup array is a single row or
column.
So we're going to match that Payment
Reference into our Customer Reference,
and comma.
The return array, we don't need to specify
the column number within a block of data,
we can just refer to the array directly.
So that's actually a little easier and a
lot more flexible, and our return array in
this case is our Amount, and comma.
The XLOOKUP also gives
us a few other options.
So if it doesn't find a match,
rather than bringing back an NA,
we can specify what value
we'd like to get back.
And actually, we prefer to get a 0, so
I'm going to type a 0 and then comma.
As well as specifying exact match,
you can specify whether it brings back
the next smaller, the next larger,
or you can even use a wildcard,
character like an asterisk,
to get back something similar.
Well, we want an exact match here,
so I'm just going to type 0, and
then there's one more optional argument.
You can actually specify your search
order, and we're happy with first to last.
So I'm going to pop a 1 in there,
close my brackets, and press Enter.
And you can see the XLOOKUP has done
the job, same job as the VLOOKUP, but
it doesn't matter which sequence the
columns are in, and if they actually move,
as long as you've named them,
you're not going to have a problem.
So actually maybe a little more intuitive
and definitely a lot more robust.
Now, let's make the same change to
this calculation as we did previously.
So I'm going to double-click into Q5,
and I'm just going to take the Amount
from this sheet and subtract the one
from the supplier statement,
and again, we have one anomaly.
Now, if you don't have
the newest version of XLOOKUP,
you might not have been able to do that,
but it's good to see how it works because
hopefully you'll get that
function really soon.
For your homework, I'm going to ask
you all to try and repeat what we've
just done but using a VLOOKUP instead,
so you get that additional practice.
The solution file will contain
the VLOOKUP, not the XLOOKUP, so
you can check you've got it right.
In the next video, we're going to look
at an even more powerful lookup function
that's available to everybody.
So don't worry if you don't
have the XLOOKUP at this stage.